---
title: Goals, Part 2
author: Daniel Seita
layout: post
permalink: /2012/08/21/goals-part-2/
categories:
  - Everything Else
tags:
  - change
  - goals
  - GRE
  - sleep
  - studying
  - Williams
---
You&#8217;re in luck. There will be a quadruple-header of blog entries (four in four days). This is the opening post.

Almost a year ago, I posted a [blog entry][1] discussing some of my short-term goals. So this is the second post in a possible series of entries that delineate objectives I set for myself. In the previously linked entry, I mentioned that the goals were for the fall 2011 semester only, but since I didn&#8217;t make another set of goals for the spring, I&#8217;ll just extend those 18 to encapsulate the spring 2012 semester and the following summer. In that respect, I completed points number 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 16, 17, and 18.

But now, I want to be more serious. *What are some of the five most important objectives I hope to achieve from now until the end of the summer of 2013?* I&#8217;ve already mentioned [blogging more][2], so I won&#8217;t say it again. But I did come up with &#8230;

***1. Maintain a better sleeping schedule***

My sophomore year&#8217;s sleeping schedule was shambolic. One night, I&#8217;d go to sleep at midnight. Then it would be 4:00 AM the following night, then back to midnight, and the madness continued. Too often, I let my work dictate how much I slept. This even caused me to uncharacteristically miss several classes by oversleeping.  So not only do I want my schedule to be stable, I also want to *shift it back a few hours* so I can comfortably wake up at 6:00 or 7:00 AM consistently. Since my earliest class on any day of the week is at 9:55 AM, I should have ample time to study, work, or blog in the morning.

***2. Study for the Graduate Record Examinations***

This is fairly straightforward. I&#8217;ll take the general GRE towards the end of my junior year, and I&#8217;ll probably take the computer science GRE subject test in the fall 2013 semester. With the exception of midterms and finals periods, I want to dedicate at least 4 hours per week to this task. The aim is to get a high enough GRE score so that my application is not immediately thrown out the window for the top computer science graduate programs. I&#8217;ve actually been studying a little this past summer by reviewing some GRE and even SAT vocabulary. Does anyone have additional recommendations for me?

***3. Maintain a 3-day workout week***

Since the start of November 2011, I&#8217;ve consistently been weight training about three days a week, with rare exceptions (they&#8217;re justified, trust me on this). Exercises include the squat, hang clean, bench press, pull ups, push ups, core circuits, leg press, calf press, and deadlifts. My strength has notably improved, and I&#8217;ve kept my body weight at around 150 pounds while avoiding any of the &#8220;Freshmen 15.&#8221; Why couldn&#8217;t I have maintained this level of dedication in high school?

***4. Pick better situations to socialize***

I&#8217;ve already [discussed at length][3] why I do not socialize well in certain situations. I need to strike a balance between avoiding them without giving the impression that I&#8217;m *too* reclusive. Related to that, I want to find ways to create more one-on-one conversations located in *quiet environments*. I don&#8217;t think I&#8217;ve done this as well as I could have in the past two years &#8212; but I have ideas to rectify that.

***5. Engage in more computer science research***

The final goal here relates both to my ongoing project of [text simplification][4] and what I hope to engage in the following summer. (I don&#8217;t think I can realistically take part in an entirely new research project during the academic year, with classes and my work-study teaching assistant duties.) My Bard College research team is still running some experiments, and I&#8217;ll be in touch with them to hopefully write up our results. I also want to focus on REU applications for the summer of 2013. I *could* work solo with a Williams faculty member over that summer, but collaborating on a project with a group of three or four researchers is much more compelling to me. I&#8217;ll be in touch with the Williams faculty nonetheless. The preliminary goal is to find a project in the area of artificial intelligence.

That&#8217;s all for now. It&#8217;s time for me to do them&#8230;.

 [1]: http://seitad.wordpress.com/2011/08/30/minor-ramblings/
 [2]: http://seitad.wordpress.com/2012/07/29/one-year-retrospective/
 [3]: http://seitad.wordpress.com/2012/08/06/hearing-aids-how-they-help-and-how-they-fall-short-in-group-situations/
 [4]: http://seitad.wordpress.com/2012/07/27/wrapping-up-my-summer-research/